Hey guys welcome back to the course in this lecture.
We're going to talk about a common scenario that can happen to you when you're hiring a freelancer or
hire a contractor.
The scenario is when a freelancer changes or raises their price on you.
Now obviously this is one of the bad bad bad situations that can happen in any type of relationship.
I mean this happened really with any vendor any customer any investor anyone really.
But with freelancers and contractors it is something that can occur.
And if you do this long enough you will run into some Dario's where a freelancer changes their price.
Now primarily when I talk about freelancers raising their price I mean that you work with the freelancer
once they did something for let's say $20 an hour then in the future when you want to contract them
for the same amount of work they say.
Now it's 30 dollars an hour or 40 dollars an hour.
Now if that's the case that is not really that unusual because you have to think of it in terms of their
portfolio.
If you've done work with them then it sounds like they're probably going to take what you did and put
it in their portfolio and also it means that time has elapsed.
So whenever they're bidding on projects now they have a lot more to show for what they've done in the
past.
And now all of a sudden they can ask for a higher price.
A lot of times freelancers will work with you and they know in their head they're working at a discounted
rate and that's solely because they don't have enough of a clientele base or enough of a portfolio.
Now that's the innocuous kind of version of this if that's the case.
Honestly what you can do is you can try to say hey we you know we worked on it before at this price.
I'd be more than happy if we continue at the rate we've established before.
Typically if you can then explain to them why your budget is is the way it is and why that previous
price worked for you.
They're usually in minable the way that you have to offset their increase in perceived value of themselves
is by using some of the perks we talked about before.
You need to find ways of making your proposal non-monetary more attractive.
Now what I mean by that you know if they are wanting $40 an hour and you're trying to get $20 an hour
you need to make everything around that proposal better.
So what you can say as oh well it's a larger block of work right.
Remember freelancers hate having to spend time finding projects but they like working on projects so
if you say to them you know this is a big hundred hour project then they might be willing to forego
the extra money that they raised.
You can also press on the fact that you have a previous working relationship which means that they can
get started much more quickly than before if they're working with a brand new contractor which means
that they can get working a lot faster than if they are working with a brand new employer.
You can always entice them with other work.
The fact that you're coming back to them means that you're serious about using them you can tell them
about how there are other projects you have that you're willing to give them.
Make it kind of like a package deal make it sound like you know I'm going to give you this project and
if you work with me at the same rate I'm going to give you these other projects so for them all of a
sudden it's like they're building a lower rate but it's for a lot more work so you can always match
price but you can always make it up for volume.
There are other smaller ways of offsetting this increase in price.
You can say to them you know you're willing to give them a great review or a testimonial.
You can even say that you can use your project as a case study.
However obviously be aware that this is actually kind of what caused the problem to begin with.
If you keep doing that the price is going to keep rising until it gets to the point where it's just
not rational for them to lower their price all the way back down to what it was originally.
Now this happens all the time work with the freelancer they do very well.
Then later I try to rehire them.
And while a good freelancer is going to do well in general they're going to have they're going to be
popular so their price has risen.
Typically I can negotiate them down to about half the price range but in some scenarios I'm actually
able to get them back near the original rate by offsetting it with other things.
A lot of times they kind of give you a oh I've worked with you before disco.
Now in this scenario that you've started a project and a freelancer raises their price that is less
common but it is still a serious deal.
So you set a milestone system and after milestone to the freelancer Assizes do raise their price.
Now what is typically going on here now the freelancers probably discovered in the middle of the work
that it's a lot more complicated than they previously thought.
Now that could be due to two things.
One you didn't give them enough information up front.
Or two they simply didn't do the diligence and the research to figure out how expensive it should have
been.
This is something that happens frequently with bidders who are bidding and they bid across lots and
lots of projects.
They simply don't have the attention span and the time spent on your project to actually be able to
forecast how much effort it's going to take reliably and so a lot of times those people drop out.
That's why we covered previously in the looking for things like message fatigue.
So if it is the case that you're in the middle of a project and a freelancer decides that it's a lot
more complicated or they need to be paid more money.
Really what you do is you need to set down and actually think about what's going on you need to assess
whether or not you put your full effort forward in describing what the project was.
And if you follow all the tips and techniques in this course this will never happen to you because there
are so many different safeguards before you even start a project to weed out people who are more likely
to do this but also to look for weaknesses in your spec sheet and your overviews so that there really
are no minds when you actually get into the actual project development.
If it is the case that you did actually misrepresent your project you need to understand that freelancers
are not psychic.
They can't possibly understand every single thing the project's going to need.
And they also are kind of basing their bid or their estimate off of a general range they think it's
going to cost it's never exact.
Now obviously if you did time and materials or you did that hybrid rate that we previously talked about
then you don't have this problem.
This is really only a problem when you're doing a project costs.
This is one of the reasons why we always say don't do a project cost.
But if it is the case you misrepresented yourself then you do need to be aware of the fact that you
probably should be paying more and you need to reassess it.
Make sure to get outside bids so that you can use that as leverage to explain to them this is a realistic
bid if it's the case that no actually they just misunderstood it.
Well typically what will happen in this case is you're going to have to explain to them the importance
of finishing the project and explain to them after that point you know we'll make sure that all future
projects are you know green light on both sides that the price is accurate and that we do double checking
to make sure that the price is OK.
In most cases the freelancer is fine with continuing because they don't want to waste their time as
well.
They want something to show for their work.
And most times just trying to talk them through it.
To explain that you gave them all the information up front.
That's usually enough for them to say OK I'm going to finish it.
But then I'm done.
If you tell them you know oh I see I understand this is a mistake but we gave you all the information
you need in the future.
It will be fixed and you tell them again leverage the fact that they can have future projects that is
usually enough to get them over the hump.
Past that you can obviously use other perks to get them to finish.
You can also use the stick as opposed to the carrot and make sure they understand that a negative review
is very powerful on their profile.
Again we tried to look for freelancers that have past histories working on the platform because then
they have something that you can kind of hold against them in case something goes wrong.
OK.
So those are the two main scenarios where you might have a price problem or a freelancer changes their
price.
One's pretty innocuous ones a lot harder and a lot trickier.
But if you follow the kind of prescriptions I've given you in this lecture you should be able to get
through the majority of problems you guys have any questions or any experiences you'd like to share.
Posts in the group discussion I'd love to help you through it.
Help you weed through any kind of sticky weird situations you have.
Otherwise I'll see in the next lecture.